docs/analog-synthesizers.md, before:

---
tags: history analog synthesizers music mus-407 electroacoustic midi
---

# Analog Synthesizers

An **analog synthesizer** is a device used to [[sound-synthesis|synthesize sound]] electronically using analog circuits.

- [Analog Synthesizers](#analog-synthesizers)
  - [History](#history)
  - [Design](#design)
    - [Design Concepts](#design-concepts)
    - [Modular](#modular)
    - [Hardware](#hardware)
    - [Connections](#connections)
  - [Manufacturers](#manufacturers)
    - [Robert Moog & Moog Music](#robert-moog--moog-music)
    - [Buchla Synthesizers](#buchla-synthesizers)
  - [Development](#development)
    - [Polyphony](#polyphony)
    - [Digital Improvements](#digital-improvements)
  - [In Pop Culture](#in-pop-culture)

## History

First developments in 1960s

Basic concepts extend from early electronic instruments

History intersects with digitally programmable circuits and digital communication protocols (MIDI) (see: [[midi]]).

Development partly driven by frustration with magnetic tape and its tedious methodologies.

## Design

### Design Concepts

The earliest synthesizers were:

- **analog**: all information represented as continuous electrical - signals
  - initially, no digital audio or digital technology
- **modular**: consisting of multiple, independent units, each with a dedicated task
- **voltage-controlled**: all modules receive, process, and output signals based on AC or DC voltages of electrical currents

### Modular

Modular design enables vast creative possibilities:

- Any module's output can be another module's input
- Multiple outputs and bridges allow flexible signal branching

Modular design led to the introduction of [[modulation-synthesis|modulation synthesis]].

Common modules:

- **VCO**: voltage-controlled oscillator
- **VCF**: voltage-controlled filter
- **VCA**: voltage-controlled amplifier
- **LFO**: low-[[docs/frequency|frequency]] oscillator
- sequencers, [[envelope|envelopes]], mixers, noise generators, etc.

### Hardware

The **transistor** replaced the vacuum tube of older instruments.

- component of solid state electronics
- semiconductor device for signal switching and amplification
- less fragile, smaller, lighter, cheaper, more energy efficient

**Linear/rotary potentiometers**: three-terminal resistor with a sliding or rotating contact that forms an adjustable voltage divider.

- (variable resistors) alter signal voltage in synthesis modules

### Connections

Early synth modules interconnected via audio patch cables:

- quarter inch
- eighth inch
- banana plug

This often resulted in complex patching configurations. However, module connections in later synths are usually handled by integrated circuits (ICs).

**Integrated circuits (ICs)**: multiple transistors built as an inseparable, functional unit

Compared to patch cables:

- immune to inevitable plug/jack failure from frequent plugging & unplugging
- less time-consuming to save and re-create patch cable configurations enabled activation of internal module connections via **routing matrix**
  - Ex: think of your go-to software synth emulators; Europa, Thor, EagenMatrix, Helm

## Manufacturers

Mid 1960s:

- **Moog Music** - Robert Moog
- **Buchla & Associates** - Don Buchla
  - later: _Buchla Electronic Music Instruments_

1970s and beyond:

- ARP Instruments - Alan Robert Pearlman (closed 1981)
- EMS Ltd. - David Cockrell & others - VCS Series synthesizers
- Oberheim - Tom Oberheim
- Yamaha - est. 1887, entered synth market ca. 1970
- Sequential Circuits - Dave Smith, acquired by Yamaha in 1987
- synths also manufactured by Roland, Korg, Kawai, Casio

Unincorporated manufacturers

- Paul Ketoff - Synket synthesizer, 1963
- Serge Tcherepnin - Serge modular synthesizer, 1973

### Robert Moog & Moog Music

Originally interested in building theremins.

1964: development of first prototype, presentation at Audio Engineering (AES) Convention

1965: _Voltage Controlled Electronic Music Modules_, AES Journal publication that details principles and applications of voltage control

> "Electronic music, as the term is understood to mean at the present time, is the class of music compositions either created solely by electronic means, or utilizing sounds which have been heavily processed electronically. The electronic composition is recorded, then presented to the listener as pre-composed sound, conceived and performed by the composer."
> ~ excerpt by Robert A. Moog from _Voltage-Controlled Electronic Music Modules_

This publication led to some purchases of early Moog synthesizers in subsequent years.

A demonstration was held at Monterey International Pop Festival (California, 1967), and other public concerts in late 1960s.

1968: _Switched on Bach_, album by Wendy Carlos, breakthrough commercial success of Moog synthesizers

Moog Music is still incorporated and producing instruments today. (ex. Moog _Grandmother_, 2018)

### Buchla Synthesizers

Buchla 100 series, mid-1960s

- commissioned by Morton Subotnick/Ramon Sender, San Francisco Tape Music Center
- born out of frustrations with tape cutting/splicing
- significant design emphasis on modularity
- Arbitrary Function Generator Module (flexible sequencer/[[envelope]] generator)
- Buchla 200-series followed in early 1970s, with significant improvements in technology

Buchla-200 series followed in early 1970s, with significant improvements in technology (see: Buchla 200-series Electric Music Box, _Silver Apples of the Moon_ by Morton Subotnick in 1967 and composed using the Buchla 100)

**Serge Modular Synthesizer**: note the 1V/oct standardization, building on Moog's voltage control principles

**ARP Synthesizers**:

- See: ARP 2600, ca. 1971
- some routing matrix connections from ARP 2500, additional options for patch cable connections

## Development

### Polyphony

Synths throughout the 1960s were **monophonic**:

- Control modules could only output one voltage at a time, each VCO produced a one-channel signal.
- Polyphony required significantly more complex circuitry

Early polyphonic synths provided polyphony with some limitations:

- _Four Voice_ - Oberheim, 1975 - complex and challenging to use
- _Polymoog_ - Moog Music, 1975 - individual voice circuitry for each note
  - full 71-note polyphony through clever circuitry, but limited programmability
  - "Polycom" voice cards enabled independent oscillators for each note
- _Prophet-5_ - Sequential Circuits, 1978
  - five-voice polyphony, first fully programmable synthesizer, first synth with microprocessors included in build
  - microprocessors enabling digital programmability

### Digital Improvements

Tools for digital control and programmability became commercially viable and available ca. mid-1970s.

This enabled the _ability to recall configurations_, among other enhancements.

"Hybrid" analog/digital synthesizers:

- GROOVE - Max Mathews @ Bell Labs, late 1960s
  - (Generated Real-Time Output Operations on Voltage-Controlled Equipment)
  - system for interactive [[music-composition|music composition]]
  - see: DDP-24 computer card rack used in GROOVE system
- Buchla 500 Series ca. 1970
- Synclavier, developed by Jon Appleton et al. at Dartmouth University

**MIDI** (Musical Instrument Digital Interface) ([[midi]])

- digital communication protocol for computers and musical instruments, developed and released in 1983
- quickly and fully embraced by the synthesizer industry

Numerous MIDI synthesizers saw commercial success:

- Yamaha DX7, DX11, Kurzweil K2000

PC Proliferation (ca. late 1980s) has migrated synthesizer development to a software platform

- _Massive_, Native-Instruments modular synthesizer plugin
- _Serum_, Xfer Records modular synthesizer plugin
- _Max/MSP_, visual programming language for audio/visual artists by Cycling '74

## In Pop Culture

Selected early/notable examples:

- _Lucky Man_ (1970) Emerson, Lake & Palmer
  - Moog Minimoog
- _Dark Side of the Moon_ (1973) Pink Floyd
  - EMS VCS3 & SynthiA
- _Blade Runner_ (1982) dir. Ridley Scott
  - music by _Vangelis_
  - Yamaha CS-80 and others
- _Twenty Systems_ (2008) Benge (Ben Edwards, UK)
  - album showcasing synthesizer evolution from 1968 to 1987

Commit message:

Add music reviews and additional music notes

docs/analog-synthesizers.md, after:

---
tags: history analog synthesizers music mus-407 electroacoustic midi
---

# Analog Synthesizers

An **analog synthesizer** is a device used to [[sound-synthesis|synthesize sound]] electronically using analog circuits.

- [Analog Synthesizers](#analog-synthesizers)
  - [History](#history)
  - [Design](#design)
    - [Design Concepts](#design-concepts)
    - [Modular](#modular)
    - [Hardware](#hardware)
    - [Connections](#connections)
  - [Manufacturers](#manufacturers)
    - [Robert Moog & Moog Music](#robert-moog--moog-music)
    - [Buchla Synthesizers](#buchla-synthesizers)
  - [Development](#development)
    - [Polyphony](#polyphony)
    - [Digital Improvements](#digital-improvements)
  - [In Pop Culture](#in-pop-culture)

## History

First developments in 1960s

Basic concepts extend from early electronic instruments

History intersects with digitally programmable circuits and digital communication protocols ([[midi|MIDI]])

Development partly driven by frustration with magnetic tape and its tedious methodologies.

## Design

### Design Concepts

The earliest synthesizers were:

- **analog**: all information represented as continuous electrical - signals
  - initially, no digital audio or digital technology
- **modular**: consisting of multiple, independent units, each with a dedicated task
- **voltage-controlled**: all modules receive, process, and output signals based on AC or DC voltages of electrical currents

### Modular

Modular design enables vast creative possibilities:

- Any module's output can be another module's input
- Multiple outputs and bridges allow flexible signal branching

Modular design led to the introduction of [[modulation-synthesis|modulation synthesis]].

Common modules:

- **VCO**: voltage-controlled oscillator
- **VCF**: voltage-controlled filter
- **VCA**: voltage-controlled amplifier
- **LFO**: low-[[docs/frequency|frequency]] oscillator
- sequencers, [[envelope|envelopes]], mixers, noise generators, etc.

### Hardware

The **transistor** replaced the vacuum tube of older instruments.

- component of solid state electronics
- semiconductor device for signal switching and amplification
- less fragile, smaller, lighter, cheaper, more energy efficient

**Linear/rotary potentiometers**: three-terminal resistor with a sliding or rotating contact that forms an adjustable voltage divider.

- (variable resistors) alter signal voltage in synthesis modules

### Connections

Early synth modules interconnected via audio patch cables:

- quarter inch
- eighth inch
- banana plug

This often resulted in complex patching configurations. However, module connections in later synths are usually handled by integrated circuits (ICs).

**Integrated circuits (ICs)**: multiple transistors built as an inseparable, functional unit

Compared to patch cables:

- immune to inevitable plug/jack failure from frequent plugging & unplugging
- less time-consuming to save and re-create patch cable configurations enabled activation of internal module connections via **routing matrix**
  - Ex: think of your go-to software synth emulators; Europa, Thor, EagenMatrix, Helm

## Manufacturers

Mid 1960s:

- **Moog Music** - Robert Moog
- **Buchla & Associates** - Don Buchla
  - later: _Buchla Electronic Music Instruments_

1970s and beyond:

- ARP Instruments - Alan Robert Pearlman (closed 1981)
- EMS Ltd. - David Cockrell & others - VCS Series synthesizers
- Oberheim - Tom Oberheim
- Yamaha - est. 1887, entered synth market ca. 1970
- Sequential Circuits - Dave Smith, acquired by Yamaha in 1987
- synths also manufactured by Roland, Korg, Kawai, Casio

Unincorporated manufacturers

- Paul Ketoff - Synket synthesizer, 1963
- Serge Tcherepnin - Serge modular synthesizer, 1973

### Robert Moog & Moog Music

Originally interested in building theremins.

1964: development of first prototype, presentation at Audio Engineering (AES) Convention

1965: _Voltage Controlled Electronic Music Modules_, AES Journal publication that details principles and applications of voltage control

> "Electronic music, as the term is understood to mean at the present time, is the class of music compositions either created solely by electronic means, or utilizing sounds which have been heavily processed electronically. The electronic composition is recorded, then presented to the listener as pre-composed sound, conceived and performed by the composer."
> ~ excerpt by Robert A. Moog from _Voltage-Controlled Electronic Music Modules_

This publication led to some purchases of early Moog synthesizers in subsequent years.

A demonstration was held at Monterey International Pop Festival (California, 1967), and other public concerts in late 1960s.

1968: _Switched on Bach_, album by Wendy Carlos, breakthrough commercial success of Moog synthesizers

Moog Music is still incorporated and producing instruments today. (ex. Moog _Grandmother_, 2018)

### Buchla Synthesizers

Buchla 100 series, mid-1960s

- commissioned by Morton Subotnick/Ramon Sender, San Francisco Tape Music Center
- born out of frustrations with tape cutting/splicing
- significant design emphasis on modularity
- Arbitrary Function Generator Module (flexible sequencer/[[envelope]] generator)
- Buchla 200-series followed in early 1970s, with significant improvements in technology

Buchla-200 series followed in early 1970s, with significant improvements in technology (see: Buchla 200-series Electric Music Box, _Silver Apples of the Moon_ by Morton Subotnick in 1967 and composed using the Buchla 100)

**Serge Modular Synthesizer**: note the 1V/oct standardization, building on Moog's voltage control principles

**ARP Synthesizers**:

- See: ARP 2600, ca. 1971
- some routing matrix connections from ARP 2500, additional options for patch cable connections

## Development

### Polyphony

Synths throughout the 1960s were **monophonic**:

- Control modules could only output one voltage at a time, each VCO produced a one-channel signal.
- Polyphony required significantly more complex circuitry

Early polyphonic synths provided polyphony with some limitations:

- _Four Voice_ - Oberheim, 1975 - complex and challenging to use
- _Polymoog_ - Moog Music, 1975 - individual voice circuitry for each note
  - full 71-note polyphony through clever circuitry, but limited programmability
  - "Polycom" voice cards enabled independent oscillators for each note
- _Prophet-5_ - Sequential Circuits, 1978
  - five-voice polyphony, first fully programmable synthesizer, first synth with microprocessors included in build
  - microprocessors enabling digital programmability

### Digital Improvements

Tools for digital control and programmability became commercially viable and available ca. mid-1970s, resulting in hybrid analog/[[digital-synthesizers|digital]] synthesizers before the eventual takeover of digital.

## In Pop Culture

Selected early/notable examples:

- _Lucky Man_ (1970) Emerson, Lake & Palmer
  - Moog Minimoog
- _Dark Side of the Moon_ (1973) Pink Floyd
  - EMS VCS3 & SynthiA
- _Blade Runner_ (1982) dir. Ridley Scott
  - music by _Vangelis_
  - Yamaha CS-80 and others
- _Twenty Systems_ (2008) Benge (Ben Edwards, UK)
  - album showcasing synthesizer evolution from 1968 to 1987
